ExtraMaterials/extra_materials.md, before:

summary: Extra Materials
id: export
categories: TODO
status: Published
authors: Ondřej Kyzr
Feedback Link: https://forms.gle/J8eeuQAJ3wMY1Wnq7

# Extra Materials

## Overview
Duration: hh:mm:ss

This is a bonus lab that will list **other tutorials** in video or other forms. You can treat it as a **library of extra materials**, where you can find good tutorials on selected topics. This library will **grow with time**, so be sure to **check it out when searching** for help.

The materials are split up into **sections** based on the topic.



## Godot Documentation

### Introduction
This is the introduction page of the **Godot Documentation**, which hosts pages about concepts such as `Key Concepts`, `GDScript Basics`, `Interface`, and `Design Philosophy`. 

[Introduction](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/introduction/index.html)

> aside positive
> Recommended for a brief overview of the most basic concepts and philosophy of Godot.

### Step by step
Continuation of the previous tutorial with pages about `Nodes`, `Scenes`, `Creating the first script`, `Player Input`, and `Signals`

[Step by step](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/step_by_step/index.html)

> aside positive
> Recommended for a refresher on basic building blocks of Godot.

### Your first 2D game
A basic tutorial about making a simple 2D game loop.

[Your first 2D game](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/first_2d_game/index.html)

> aside positive
> A good staring point for making a basic 2D game, getting to know the Godot workflow.

### Your first 3D game
A basic tutorial about making a simple 3D game loop.

[Your first 3D game](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/first_3d_game/index.html)

> aside positive
> A good staring point for making a basic 3D game, getting to know the Godot workflow.

### From Unity to Godot Engine
Old but useful guide for people coming from the **Unity Engine** to **Godot**.

[From Unity to Godot Engine](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/3.1/getting_started/editor/unity_to_godot.html)

> aside positive
> Good for people already familiar with game development in the **Unity Engine**, that want to learn **Godot**.




## Programming & Best Practices

### Cross-language scripting
A basic cross language scripting guide to combine `GDScript` and `C#` in a single project.

[Cross-language scripting](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/cross_language_scripting.html)

> aside positive
> Recommended for advanced users that want to take advantage of the speed of `C#` for more complex algorithms.


### How to program in Godot - GDScript Tutorial
An **extensive overview** of the whole `GDScript` programming language. From simple **data types** and **loops** to **signals**, **classes**, **inheritance**, and **node concepts** such as "call down, signal up".

<video id=e1zJS31tr88></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video for a **quick lookup** on a coding topic or a **full overview**, so that you know what is at your disposal when using Godot.


### Fixing Rookie Mistakes in Godot
In depth into **best practices**, **common mistakes**, and **coding**. It does so though fixing an already existing simple `Asteroids` game made in **Godot**.

<video id=uA2qqLrf_5Y></video>

> aside positive
> This video is an interesting look at how programming differs based on the **experience of the programmer**.


### Godot Singletons
An introduction into **Autoloads** in **Godot**. Shows how to create **autoload manager** nodes and takes a brief overview of other programming patterns.

<video id=ske-iL4mxdI></video>

> aside positive
> Useful for getting to know common programming patterns, mainly `Singletons`.


### Custom Resources

#### Custom Resource are a MUST KNOW in Godot | Complete Tutorial
Provides a complete **overview** of `Resources`, how they **can be used**, how you can **create your own** `Custom Resources`, and why they are a **powerful tool** that should be used.

<video id=zbAKzM-Odb4></video>

> aside positive
> I suggest this video if the concept of `Resouces` in **Godot** is still **unclear to you**.

#### Custom Resources - A Godot Workflow GAME CHANGER
This video is similar to the last one but only 4 minutes in length, giving a very fast but more visual overview on how to use `Custom Resources`.

<video id=vzRZjM9MTGw></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video to **almost everyone**, since you never know how could `Custom Resources` help you develop your game.




## Math Materials
Duration: hh:mm:ss

### An In-Depth look at Lerp, Smoothstep, and Shaping Functions
Not a **Godot** video per se but dives into **linear interpolation** and related **mathematical concepts**, which is important for game development.

<video id=YJB1QnEmlTs></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video if you are s**truggling to understand** or **use** linear interpolation and easing (shaping) functions.


### What Kind of Math Should Game Developers Know?
A brief overview of the **basic math needed for developing games**. Topics include: **Lerp**, **Angles**, **Trigonometry**, **Matrices**, **Gimbal Lock**, and **Quaternions**. Includes a quick look at linear interpolation from the video above.


<video id=eRVRioN4GwA></video>

> aside positive
> This video is mostly for people struggling with the **math side of game development** or if you need a **refresher**.




## Audio Materials

### How I do Sound Effects in Godot
A good look a how an `AudioManager` could be implemented in **Godot** with a practical example. This video inspired the `AudioManager` we use in the **Audio codelab**.

<video id=Egf2jgET3nQ></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video for people wanting to know more about **handling sound effects a music** in games.


### How to make SOUND EFFECTS for GAMES - EASY TUTORIAL
An easy and quick guide how you can **create sound effect** in a free program called `Audacity`.

<video id=MjusZESiLiw></video>

> aside positive
> An excellent video for people with missing sound effects in their game. The whole process is very easy, and I recommend it for almost everyone.




## UI Materials

### A Guide to Creating USER INTERFACE in Godot 4.3+
An in-depth tutorial on creating a `Menu` with **buttons**, **settings**, **score**, **tutorial**, etc.

<video id=KOyREJu1P3I></video>

> aside positive
> This tutorial is good for someone who wants to get to know UI a bit more than we covered in the codelabs.


TODO more




## Animations & Visuals

### Animation Tree State Machine Setup w/ Conditions & BlendSpace2D - Godot 4 Resource Gatherer Tutorial
This video focuses on the `AnimationTree` and `AnimationBlendTrees` with nice examples.

<video id=WrMORzl3g1U></video>

### Lighting in Godot for Beginners
A very good video about lighting scenes in Godot and in general. Shows you good examples and all the options you have, when it comes to lighting.

<video id=aRdiiWpA0AA></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video to most people because we didn't really go in-depth into lighting in the codelabs. 


## Multiplayer Materials
This whole section is about making **online multiplayer games** and I only recommend it to people who are interested in making them.

### Add Multiplayer to your Godot Game!
This video takes a 2D platforming game from **Brackeys** and adds a multiplayer to it.

<video id=V4a_J38XdHk></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video to someone who already has a singleplayer game and want to make it multiplayer.


### High-level multiplayer
A great page in the Godot Documentation about making a functional multiplayer game in Godot. It is a bit more technical, but you should be able to follow it.

[High-level multiplayer](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/networking/high_level_multiplayer.html)




## Debugging Materials

### The Fastest way I've found to Test my Games
This video shows how you can create and use your own debugging tools (similar to `GlobalDebug` in the codelabs) but much better and more complex.

<video id=L3Eed5HEnuQ></video>

> aside positive
> Generally recommended for everyone, since it makes debugging and testing your games that much easier.


## Feedback
Duration: hh:mm:ss

Even in this extra codelab I would be very grateful if you could take a moment to fill out a **very short feedback form** (it takes less than a minute). Your feedback will prove very useful for my master's thesis, where I will use it to evaluate the work I have done.
<button>
  [Google Forms](https://forms.gle/xcsTDRJH2sjiuCjP7)
</button>

> aside positive
> This entire course, as well as the game we are creating, is part of my master's thesis.

Commit message:

Extra Materials - Added ragdoll tutorial

ExtraMaterials/extra_materials.md, after:

summary: Extra Materials
id: export
categories: TODO
status: Published
authors: Ondřej Kyzr
Feedback Link: https://forms.gle/J8eeuQAJ3wMY1Wnq7

# Extra Materials

## Overview
Duration: hh:mm:ss

This is a bonus lab that will list **other tutorials** in video or other forms. You can treat it as a **library of extra materials**, where you can find good tutorials on selected topics. This library will **grow with time**, so be sure to **check it out when searching** for help.

The materials are split up into **sections** based on the topic.



## Godot Documentation

### Introduction
This is the introduction page of the **Godot Documentation**, which hosts pages about concepts such as `Key Concepts`, `GDScript Basics`, `Interface`, and `Design Philosophy`. 

[Introduction](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/introduction/index.html)

> aside positive
> Recommended for a brief overview of the most basic concepts and philosophy of Godot.

### Step by step
Continuation of the previous tutorial with pages about `Nodes`, `Scenes`, `Creating the first script`, `Player Input`, and `Signals`

[Step by step](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/step_by_step/index.html)

> aside positive
> Recommended for a refresher on basic building blocks of Godot.

### Your first 2D game
A basic tutorial about making a simple 2D game loop.

[Your first 2D game](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/first_2d_game/index.html)

> aside positive
> A good staring point for making a basic 2D game, getting to know the Godot workflow.

### Your first 3D game
A basic tutorial about making a simple 3D game loop.

[Your first 3D game](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/first_3d_game/index.html)

> aside positive
> A good staring point for making a basic 3D game, getting to know the Godot workflow.

### From Unity to Godot Engine
Old but useful guide for people coming from the **Unity Engine** to **Godot**.

[From Unity to Godot Engine](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/3.1/getting_started/editor/unity_to_godot.html)

> aside positive
> Good for people already familiar with game development in the **Unity Engine**, that want to learn **Godot**.




## Programming & Best Practices

### Cross-language scripting
A basic cross language scripting guide to combine `GDScript` and `C#` in a single project.

[Cross-language scripting](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/cross_language_scripting.html)

> aside positive
> Recommended for advanced users that want to take advantage of the speed of `C#` for more complex algorithms.


### How to program in Godot - GDScript Tutorial
An **extensive overview** of the whole `GDScript` programming language. From simple **data types** and **loops** to **signals**, **classes**, **inheritance**, and **node concepts** such as "call down, signal up".

<video id=e1zJS31tr88></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video for a **quick lookup** on a coding topic or a **full overview**, so that you know what is at your disposal when using Godot.


### Fixing Rookie Mistakes in Godot
In depth into **best practices**, **common mistakes**, and **coding**. It does so though fixing an already existing simple `Asteroids` game made in **Godot**.

<video id=uA2qqLrf_5Y></video>

> aside positive
> This video is an interesting look at how programming differs based on the **experience of the programmer**.


### Godot Singletons
An introduction into **Autoloads** in **Godot**. Shows how to create **autoload manager** nodes and takes a brief overview of other programming patterns.

<video id=ske-iL4mxdI></video>

> aside positive
> Useful for getting to know common programming patterns, mainly `Singletons`.


### Custom Resources

#### Custom Resource are a MUST KNOW in Godot | Complete Tutorial
Provides a complete **overview** of `Resources`, how they **can be used**, how you can **create your own** `Custom Resources`, and why they are a **powerful tool** that should be used.

<video id=zbAKzM-Odb4></video>

> aside positive
> I suggest this video if the concept of `Resouces` in **Godot** is still **unclear to you**.

#### Custom Resources - A Godot Workflow GAME CHANGER
This video is similar to the last one but only 4 minutes in length, giving a very fast but more visual overview on how to use `Custom Resources`.

<video id=vzRZjM9MTGw></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video to **almost everyone**, since you never know how could `Custom Resources` help you develop your game.

## Physics Materials
Duration: hh:mm:ss

### How to Make Ragdolls in Godot 4 - Godot 4 Tutorial
A **short tutorial** on how to create ragdolls of skeletons in Godot 4.

<video id=Rzoz2YDrDlQ></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video for those who want to use ragdolls in their project.


## Math Materials
Duration: hh:mm:ss

### An In-Depth look at Lerp, Smoothstep, and Shaping Functions
Not a **Godot** video per se but dives into **linear interpolation** and related **mathematical concepts**, which is important for game development.

<video id=YJB1QnEmlTs></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video if you are s**truggling to understand** or **use** linear interpolation and easing (shaping) functions.


### What Kind of Math Should Game Developers Know?
A brief overview of the **basic math needed for developing games**. Topics include: **Lerp**, **Angles**, **Trigonometry**, **Matrices**, **Gimbal Lock**, and **Quaternions**. Includes a quick look at linear interpolation from the video above.


<video id=eRVRioN4GwA></video>

> aside positive
> This video is mostly for people struggling with the **math side of game development** or if you need a **refresher**.




## Audio Materials

### How I do Sound Effects in Godot
A good look a how an `AudioManager` could be implemented in **Godot** with a practical example. This video inspired the `AudioManager` we use in the **Audio codelab**.

<video id=Egf2jgET3nQ></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video for people wanting to know more about **handling sound effects a music** in games.


### How to make SOUND EFFECTS for GAMES - EASY TUTORIAL
An easy and quick guide how you can **create sound effect** in a free program called `Audacity`.

<video id=MjusZESiLiw></video>

> aside positive
> An excellent video for people with missing sound effects in their game. The whole process is very easy, and I recommend it for almost everyone.




## UI Materials

### A Guide to Creating USER INTERFACE in Godot 4.3+
An in-depth tutorial on creating a `Menu` with **buttons**, **settings**, **score**, **tutorial**, etc.

<video id=KOyREJu1P3I></video>

> aside positive
> This tutorial is good for someone who wants to get to know UI a bit more than we covered in the codelabs.


TODO more




## Animations & Visuals

### Animation Tree State Machine Setup w/ Conditions & BlendSpace2D - Godot 4 Resource Gatherer Tutorial
This video focuses on the `AnimationTree` and `AnimationBlendTrees` with nice examples.

<video id=WrMORzl3g1U></video>

### Lighting in Godot for Beginners
A very good video about lighting scenes in Godot and in general. Shows you good examples and all the options you have, when it comes to lighting.

<video id=aRdiiWpA0AA></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video to most people because we didn't really go in-depth into lighting in the codelabs. 


## Multiplayer Materials
This whole section is about making **online multiplayer games** and I only recommend it to people who are interested in making them.

### Add Multiplayer to your Godot Game!
This video takes a 2D platforming game from **Brackeys** and adds a multiplayer to it.

<video id=V4a_J38XdHk></video>

> aside positive
> I recommend this video to someone who already has a singleplayer game and want to make it multiplayer.


### High-level multiplayer
A great page in the Godot Documentation about making a functional multiplayer game in Godot. It is a bit more technical, but you should be able to follow it.

[High-level multiplayer](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/networking/high_level_multiplayer.html)




## Debugging Materials

### The Fastest way I've found to Test my Games
This video shows how you can create and use your own debugging tools (similar to `GlobalDebug` in the codelabs) but much better and more complex.

<video id=L3Eed5HEnuQ></video>

> aside positive
> Generally recommended for everyone, since it makes debugging and testing your games that much easier.


## Feedback
Duration: hh:mm:ss

Even in this extra codelab I would be very grateful if you could take a moment to fill out a **very short feedback form** (it takes less than a minute). Your feedback will prove very useful for my master's thesis, where I will use it to evaluate the work I have done.
<button>
  [Google Forms](https://forms.gle/xcsTDRJH2sjiuCjP7)
</button>

> aside positive
> This entire course, as well as the game we are creating, is part of my master's thesis.
